feat(weave): improve DSPy integration (#5184)
wandb/weave: docs/docs/guides/integrations/dspy.md

  <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

> [DSPy](https://dspy.ai/) is a framework for algorithmically optimizing LM prompts and weights, especially when LMs are used one or more times within a pipeline. Weave automatically tracks and logs calls made using DSPy modules and functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[DSPy](https://dspy.ai/) is a framework for algorithmically optimizing LM prompts and weights, especially when LMs are used one or more times within a pipeline. Using the DSPy Weave integration, Weave will automatically tracks and log calls made using DSPy modules and functions.
```

:::note Support for DSPy 3.x

> The integration supports the new DSPy 3.x version. Features like Evaluation and Optimization are not supported for version below 3.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DSPy Weave integration supports DSPy version 3.x. Features like Evaluation and Optimization are not supported for versions below 3.x.
```

os.environ["OPENAI_API_KEY"] = "<YOUR-OPENAI-API-KEY>"

# Initialize Weave with your project name
# highlight-next-line
weave.init(project_name="dspy_demo")

# Run your DSPy program as is
lm = dspy.LM('openai/gpt-4o-mini')
dspy.configure(lm=lm)
classify = dspy.Predict("sentence -> sentiment")
classify(sentence="it's a charming and often affecting journey.")
```

> ![dspy_trace.png](imgs/dspy/dspy-trace.png)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![dspy_trace.png](imgs/dspy/dspy-trace.png)
```

Weave logs all LM calls in your DSPy program, providing details about inputs, outputs, latency of each component, token counts, cost and more.

- Learn how to navigate the trace for a given sample: [Navigate the Trace View](../tracking/trace-tree.md)
- Leave or review annotations on any call: [Feedback](../tracking/feedback.md)

### Track your custom DSPy Modules and Signatures

> A `Module` is the building block with learnable parameters for DSPy programs that abstracts a prompting technique. A `Signature` is a declarative specification of input/output behavior of a DSPy Module. Weave automatically tracks all in-built and custom Signatures and Modules in your DSPy programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Module` is the building block for DSPy programs that abstracts a prompting technique with learnable parameters. A `Signature` is a declarative specification of input/output behavior of a DSPy Module. Weave automatically tracks all in-built and custom Modules and Signatures in your DSPy programs.
```

article = draft_article(topic="World Cup 2002")
```

![](imgs/dspy/dspy_custom_module.png)

## Evaluation of your DSPy Program

Weave now provides tighter integration with DSPy evaluation workflow. When you run `dspy.Evaluate`, weave automatically logs:

> - Aggregated metrics for the evaluation run and per-sample scores you return from your metrics,
> - Per-sample inputs/outputs to full execution traces for deep debugging,
> - Token usage, latency, and cost tracking when Weave is initialized before model calls
> - Model configuration and metadata for richer side-by-side comparisons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Aggregated metrics and per-sample scores for the evaluation run
- Per-sample inputs/outputs and full execution traces for deep debugging
- Token usage, latency, and cost tracking when Weave is initialized before model calls
- Model configuration and metadata for side-by-side comparisons
```

> To run the example below do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before running the below code sample, install this `pip` package from `hendrycks/math` on GitHub.
```

    num_threads=24,
    display_progress=True,
    return_all_scores=True,
    return_outputs=True,
    provide_traceback=True,
    failure_score=0.0,
)

result = evaluate(module)
```

After the run completes, click on the weave url and navigate to the Evals view to see the evaluation summary, metrics, and per-sample rows. You can drill into any row to inspect the full trace and artifacts that produced that output.

![](imgs/dspy/dspy_eval.png)

### Compare evaluation runs

Evaluation logging enables both holistic and sample-wise comparisons:

- Holistic: compare aggregate metrics and model metadata across evaluation runs
- Sample-wise: page through the same dataset example to see how different models/pipelines performed

From the Evals tab, select multiple evals and click Compare. See [EvaluationLogger (Comparisons section)](../evaluation/evaluation_logger.md#log-and-compare-multiple-evaluations) and the general [Comparison](../tools/comparison.md) guide for details on the comparison UI and controls.

| ![](imgs/dspy/dspy_eval_comparison.png) | ![](imgs/dspy/dspy_eval_comparison_samples.png) |
|---|---|
| Holistic comparison view | Sample-wise comparison view |

## Optimization

> One of the most powerful offering by DSPy is their optimization module. You can use the integration to log the traces and get more of out of your optimization workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DSPy features a powerful [optimization module](https://dspy.ai/learn/optimization/overview/) that helps tune the prompts or weights in your program.
```

module = dspy.ChainOfThought("question -> answer: str, explanation: str")
optimizer = dspy.BootstrapFewShot(metric=accuracy_metric)
optimized_module = optimizer.compile(
    module, trainset=dataset.train[:5]
)
```

![](imgs/dspy/dspy_optimization.png)

### Bringing W&B Models to track improvement of program signature

For optimizers that use `dspy.Evaluate` under the hood (ex: MIPROv2), you can optionally [initialize a `wandb` run](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/track/create-an-experiment/) which will log the evaluation metrics over time as a line chart and log the evolution of the program signature as [W&B Tables](https://docs.wandb.ai/guides/models/tables/).

:::info This is an experimental feature

> Bringing both W&B Models and Weave to improve your DSPy optimization workflow is experimental. We will keep improving the integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using both W&B Models and Weave to improve your DSPy optimization workflow is experimental. 
```

:::

To use this feature first install `wandb` sdk.

```bash
pip install wandb
```

```python
from tkinter.constants import TRUE
import dspy
from dspy.datasets import MATH

import weave
# import wandb and the callback
# highlight-next-line
import wandb
from wandb.integration.dspy import WandbDSPyCallback

wandb_project = "dspy-eval-models"

weave.init(wandb_project)
wandb.init(project=wandb_project)

# add the callback as dspy settings
# highlight-next-line
dspy.settings.callbacks.append(WandbDSPyCallback())

gpt4o_mini = dspy.LM('openai/gpt-4o-mini', max_tokens=2000)
gpt4o = dspy.LM('openai/gpt-4o', max_tokens=2000, cache=True)
dspy.configure(lm=gpt4o_mini)

dataset = MATH(subset='algebra')

module = dspy.ChainOfThought("question -> answer")

THREADS = 24

optimizer_kwargs = dict(
    num_threads=THREADS, teacher_settings=dict(lm=gpt4o), prompt_model=gpt4o_mini
)
optimizer = dspy.MIPROv2(metric=dataset.metric, auto="light", **optimizer_kwargs)

compile_kwargs = dict(requires_permission_to_run=False, max_bootstrapped_demos=2, max_labeled_demos=2)
optimized_module = optimizer.compile(module, trainset=dataset.train, **compile_kwargs)
print(optimized_module)
```

> Running this program will give you both the W&B run and Weave URLs. You can click on the W&B run url to check out the logged metrics and W&B Table. You can click on the "Overview" tab of the run page to find out the traces associated with this optimization run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running this program will generate both W&B run and Weave URLs. You can click on the W&B run URL to check out the logged metrics and view the W&B Table. You can click on the **Overview** tab of the run page to see the traces associated with the optimization run.
```

![](imgs/dspy/dspy_models_weave.png)

## FAQ

### How can I reduce ingestion volume?

> DSPy often includes a verbose `history` in calls, which can increase ingestion volume and slow logging traces especially for evals and optimizations. To suppress logging of DSPy history fields in Weave, set the following environment variable before running your program:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DSPy includes a verbose `history` in calls, which increase ingestion volume and slow logging traces when running evals and optimizations. To suppress logging of `history` fields in Weave, set the following environment variable before running your program:
```

```bash
export WEAVE_DSPY_HIDE_HISTORY=true
```

> 
> Accepted truthy values are `true`, `1`, or `yes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
